UPS Wins 2016 INFORMS Franz Edelman Award for Changing the
Accessibility: Skip TopNav
Consumer Products and Services News
Automobiles and Parts News
Food & Beverage News
Home Goods & Construction News
Leisure Goods News
Media & Entertainment News
Personal Care  News
Retail News
Travel and Leisure News
Energy News
Alternative Energy News
Oil Gas and Coal News
Chemicals News
Banks & Financial Services News
Banking News
Closed-End Investments News
Finance and Credit Services News
Investment Banking and Brokerage Services News
Insurance News
Real Estate & REITs News
Healthcare News
Healthcare Providers News
Medical Equipment News
Medical Supplies and Services News
Biotechnology News
Pharmaceuticals News
Cannabis Producers News
Industrials and Utilities News
Aerospace and Defense News
Construction and Materials News
Utilities News
Industrials News
Metals & Mining News
Technology and Telecom News
Software News
IT Services News
Semiconductors News
Electronic Components & Equipment News
Computer Hardware News
Telecom Equipment News
Telecom Services News
More
Browse the Latest News
UPS Wins 2016 INFORMS Franz Edelman Award for Changing the Future of Package Delivery
UPS Game Changing Operations Research Project Expected to Save 100 Million Miles Driven Per Year
April 12, 2016 09:15 ET
| Source:
UPS
UPS
ATLANTA, April  12, 2016  (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- A global leader in analytics, operations research and technology, UPS
®
(NYSE: UPS) has won the prestigious
INFORMS
Franz Edelman Award for Achievement in Operations Research and the Management Sciences for its proprietary routing software
ORION
(On-Road Integrated Optimization and Navigation).
ORION uses advanced fleet telematics and complex algorithms to crunch 1,000 pages of code and more than 250 million address data points to provide UPS drivers with optimized delivery routes each day. Following the prototyping period between 2008 and 2011, and the official launch in 2013, ORION is on track to complete U.S. deployment by the end of 2016.
“ORION is a testament to the scale of innovation that can be accomplished when operations research, information technology and business processes are seamlessly integrated,” said Juan Perez, UPS chief information officer. “Success didn’t come overnight. It took hard work by 700-plus UPS employees who dedicated themselves to the development and deployment of ORION for many years. And we are just at the beginning of harnessing the power of ORION to fuel new, innovative products and services.
Once U.S. implementation is complete at the end of this year, the ORION deployment is expected to result in an annual savings of 10 million gallons of fuel, a reduction of 100,000 metric tons in CO2 emissions, and an estimated $300 to $400 million in savings and cost avoidance. ”ORION has been a game changer for UPS, impacting 55,000 drivers across 1,000 buildings in the United States when it is fully deployed,” said Mark Wallace, senior vice president of global engineering and sustainability. “ORION has made us better at serving our customers - how they want, when they want, where they want.”
UPS is also proud to honor Carnegie Mellon University Heinz College, the winner of the INFORMS 2016 UPS George D. Smith prize. The prize is awarded to an academic department or program for effective and innovative preparation of students to be good practitioners of operations research, management science or analytics. Named in honor of the late UPS chief executive officer from 1962 to 1972, George Smith was a patron of operations research. Carnegie Mellon University’s Heinz College has an approach to analytics education that resides on the bedrock principle that analytic thinking and methods only matter if they can be used to solve real problems.
The Edelman award competition recognizes remarkable examples of real-world applications of advanced analytics and operations research projects that are changing the world. Finalists were evaluated for their project’s demonstrated effect on organizational efficiency, improved business results and customer service impacts, among other criteria.
About UPS
UPS (NYSE: UPS) is a global leader in logistics, offering a broad range of solutions including the transportation of packages and freight; the facilitation of international trade, and the deployment of advanced technology to more efficiently manage the world of business. Headquartered in Atlanta, UPS serves more than 220 countries and territories worldwide. The company can be found on the Web at ups.com
®
and its corporate blog can be found at
Longitudes.ups.com
. To get UPS news direct, visit
pressroom.ups.com/RSS
.
About INFORMS
With nearly 12,000 members from around the globe, INFORMS is the leading international association for professionals in analytics and operations research. INFORMS advances research and promotes best practices in analytics and operations research through an array of highly-cited publications, conferences, competitions, networking communities, and professional development services. More information about INFORMS, analytics, and operations research is available at
www.informs.org
or
@informs
.
Tags
UPS
ORION
Attachments
UPS ORION: The Driver Helper...
Contact Data
Kim Krebs
(404) 828-4404
kkrebs@ups.com
Contact
close
Contact
With a Reader Account, it's easy to send email directly to the contact for this release.
Sign up today for your free Reader Account!
Already have an account?
Log in here.
GlobeNewswire